Classification: ROC and AUC
Author: Google for Developers / Machine Learning Crash Course
Source: https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/crash-course/classification/roc-and-auc
License: CC-BY-4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
Changes: HTML lesson converted to UTF-8 TXT; navigation, multiple-choice quizzes, figures, captions, code blocks and generated key takeaways omitted; attribution header added.

The previous section presented a set of model metrics, all calculated at a
single classification threshold value. But if you want to evaluate a
model's quality across all possible thresholds, you need different tools.

Receiver-operating characteristic curve (ROC)

The ROC curve
is a visual representation of model performance across all thresholds.
The long version of the name, receiver operating characteristic, is a holdover
from WWII radar detection.

The ROC curve is drawn by calculating the true positive rate (TPR)
and false positive rate (FPR) at every possible threshold (in practice, at
selected intervals), then graphing TPR over FPR. A perfect model,
which at some threshold has a TPR of 1.0 and a FPR of 0.0, can
be represented by either a point at
(0, 1) if all other thresholds are ignored, or by the following:

Area under the curve (AUC)

The area under the ROC curve (AUC)
represents the probability that the model,
if given a randomly chosen positive and negative example, will rank the
positive higher than the negative.

The perfect model above, containing a square with sides of length 1, has an
area under the curve (AUC) of 1.0. This means there is a 100% probability that
the model will correctly rank a randomly chosen positive example higher than a
randomly chosen negative example. In other words, looking at the spread of
data points below, AUC gives the probability that the model will place a
randomly chosen square to the right of a randomly chosen circle, independent of
where the threshold is set.

In more concrete terms, a spam classifier with AUC
of 1.0 always assigns a random spam email a higher probability of being
spam than a random legitimate email. The actual classification of each
email depends on the threshold that you choose.

For a binary classifier, a model that does exactly as well as random guesses or
coin flips has a ROC that is a diagonal line from (0,0) to (1,1). The AUC is
0.5, representing a 50% probability of correctly ranking a random positive and
negative example.

In the spam classifier example, a spam classifier with AUC of 0.5 assigns
a random spam email a higher probability of being spam than a random
legitimate email only half the time.

(Optional, advanced) Precision-recall curve

AUC and ROC work well for comparing models when the dataset is roughly
balanced between classes. When the dataset is imbalanced, precision-recall
curves (PRCs) and the area under those curves may offer a better comparative
visualization of model performance. Precision-recall curves are created by
plotting precision on the y-axis and recall on the x-axis across all
thresholds.

AUC and ROC for choosing model and threshold

AUC is a useful measure for comparing the performance of two different models,
as long as the dataset is roughly balanced. The model with greater area under
the curve is generally the better one.

The points on a ROC curve closest to (0,1) represent a range of the
best-performing thresholds for the given model. As discussed in the
Thresholds,
Confusion matrix
and
Choice of metric and tradeoffs
sections, the threshold you choose depends on which metric is most important to
the specific use case. Consider the points A, B, and C in the following
diagram, each representing a threshold:

If false positives (false alarms) are highly costly, it may make sense to
choose a threshold that gives a lower FPR, like the one at point A, even if TPR
is reduced. Conversely, if false positives are cheap and false negatives
(missed true positives) highly costly, the threshold for point C, which
maximizes TPR, may be preferable. If the costs are roughly equivalent, point B
may offer the best balance between TPR and FPR.

Here is the ROC curve for the data we have seen before:

Key terms:

Area under the ROC curve (AUC)

ROC curve
