Overfitting
Author: Google for Developers / Machine Learning Crash Course
Source: https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/crash-course/overfitting/overfitting
License: CC-BY-4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
Changes: HTML lesson converted to UTF-8 TXT; navigation, multiple-choice quizzes, figures, captions, code blocks and generated key takeaways omitted; attribution header added.

Overfitting means creating a model
that matches (memorizes) the
training set so
closely that the model fails to make correct predictions on new data.
An overfit model is analogous to an invention that performs well in the lab but
is worthless in the real world.

Tip:
Overfitting is a common problem in machine learning, not an academic
hypothetical.

In Figure 11, imagine that each geometric shape represents a tree's position
in a square forest. The blue diamonds mark the locations of healthy trees,
while the orange circles mark the locations of sick trees.

Mentally draw any shapes—lines, curves, ovals...anything—to separate the
healthy trees from the sick trees. Then, expand the next line to examine
one possible separation.

Expand to see one possible solution (Figure 12).

The complex shapes shown in Figure 12 successfully categorized all but two of
the trees. If we think of the shapes as a model, then this is a fantastic
model.

Or is it? A truly excellent model successfully categorizes new examples.
Figure 13 shows what happens when that same model makes predictions on new
examples from the test set:

So, the complex model shown in Figure 12 did a great job on the training set
but a pretty bad job on the test set. This is a classic case of a model
overfitting to the training set data.

Fitting, overfitting, and underfitting

A model must make good predictions on new data.
That is, you're aiming to create a model that "fits" new data.

As you've seen, an overfit model makes excellent predictions on the training
set but poor predictions on new data. An
underfit model
doesn't even make good predictions on the training data. If an overfit model is
like a product that performs well in the lab but poorly in the real world,
then an underfit model is like a product that doesn't even do well in
the lab.

Generalization is the
opposite of overfitting. That is, a model that generalizes well makes good
predictions on new data. Your goal is to create a model that generalizes
well to new data.

Detecting overfitting

The following curves help you detect overfitting:

loss curves

generalization curves

A loss curve plots a model's loss
against the number of training iterations.
A graph that shows two or more loss curves is called a generalization
curve. The following
generalization curve shows two loss curves:

Notice that the two loss curves behave similarly at first and then diverge.
That is, after a certain number of iterations, loss declines or
holds steady (converges) for the training set, but increases
for the validation set. This suggests overfitting.

In contrast, a generalization curve for a well-fit model shows two loss curves
that have similar shapes.

What causes overfitting?

Very broadly speaking, overfitting is caused by one or both of the following
problems:

The training set doesn't adequately represent real life data (or the
validation set or test set).

The model is too complex.

Generalization conditions

A model trains on a training set, but the real test of a model's worth is how
well it makes predictions on new examples, particularly on real-world data.
While developing a model, your test set serves as a proxy for real-world data.
Training a model that generalizes well implies the following dataset conditions:

Examples must be
independently and identically distributed,
which is a fancy way of saying that your
examples can't influence each other.

The dataset is
stationary, meaning the
dataset doesn't change significantly over time.

The dataset partitions have the same distribution.
That is, the examples in the training set are statistically similar to the
examples in the validation set, test set, and real-world data.

Explore the preceding conditions through the following exercises.

Challenge exercise

You are creating a model that predicts the ideal date for riders to buy a
train ticket for a particular route. For example, the model might recommend
that users buy their ticket on July 8 for a train that departs July 23.
The train company updates prices hourly, basing their updates on a variety
of factors but mainly on the current number of available seats. That is:

If a lot of seats are available, ticket prices are typically low.

If very few seats are available, ticket prices are typically high.

Your model exhibits low
loss on the validation set and the test set but sometimes makes
terrible predictions on real-world data. Why?

Click here to see the answer

Answer: The real world model is struggling with a
feedback loop.

For example, suppose the model recommends that users buy tickets on July 8.
Some riders who use the model's recommendation buy their tickets at 8:30
in the morning on July 8. At 9:00, the train company raises prices because
fewer seats are now available. Riders using the model's recommendation have
altered prices. By evening, ticket prices might be much higher than in the
morning.

Key terms:

Feedback loop

Generalization

Generalization curve

Independently and identically distributed (i.i.d)

Loss curve

Overfitting

Stationarity

Training set

Underfitting
